FORESCASTING FISH ESCAPES BASED ON WAVE HEIGHT AND FISH LANDINGS PATTERNS
Javier Atalah*, Pablo Sánchez-Jerez and Kilian Toledo-Guedes
1Department of Marine Science and Applied Biology, University of Alicante, Spain.
*Corresponding author: j.atalah@ua.es

Abstract
Fish escapes pose a considerable threat to marine ecosystems and the aquaculture industry's productivity. The primary cause of these incidents is equipment failure under extreme oceanic conditions, a concern exacerbated by the anticipated increase in frequency and intensity of extreme weather events due to climate change. To address this, developing forecasting models is crucial for informing farm management and mitigating potential impacts. In this study, we detected anomalies in artisanal fisheries landings data from 2004 to 2021 for the two most cultivated species along the Spanish Mediterranean coast and used them as a proxy for escape events. Augmenting this information with wave height data collected from monitoring buoys, we constructed escape predictive models. Overall, landing biomass and wave height gradually increased from 2004 onwards. The predictive models generally demonstrated better performance for seabream compared to seabass. Regression analyses revealed significant associations between wave height and fish landings at most analysed fish markets, with more potent effects observed for the previous day's data. Classification models effectively distinguished landing anomalies associated with fish escapes, achieving high model accuracies (average of 0.80) and ROC values (>0.90). A weak correlation was identified between the distance of the fish market to the nearest farm and the impact of wave height. Considering the ecological, genetic, pathogenic, and socio-economic repercussions linked to fish escapes, the presented predictive models offer an avenue for early warning systems to prevent such incidents, potentially enhancing the sustainability and adaptability of the aquaculture industry to climate change.
Keywords: Mediterranean seabass, Gilthead seabream, fish escapes, climate change, extreme weather, aquaculture, Spain.
